In programming we can use loops to make repetitive tasks much easier.
For example with a loop through all your friends names inside a database and then display them onto
the screen.
This saves type not the same line of code over and over again for each friend.
In this video taken a look at the four types of loops we can use in pitch p.
I'm going to begin with what's called a while loop.
And while loops are basically rún a block of cold so long as a condition is true.
So let's take a look AARD while while loop looks like in page B some when a create a variable set to
be one.
And a while loop is set out a little bit similar to a if statements that were looked at a few videos
ago.
So what the while key word the condition would in the brackets to test and then the outcome to perform
between the curly braces.
So I would start by check in if I were a variable of number.
Is less than 10.
So while our number is less than 10 you're going to create a echo.
No and the retiled itself first and then I'll explain what to do when so is less than 10.
I will also need a brain scan there.
Can you see why in just a moment.
And then the variable number were on two increments with D plus plus.
OK so you may be looking at this and wondering what is going on.
So basically were creating a loop amistad to test if the number is less than 10 which it is.
So in that case you want to print out a number.
So being number one is less than 10.
And then once this is printed will it going to increment the number by using the plus plus size will
change the value of number 2 and 2.
So then this condition is still true because number two is still less than 10.
So then the second time round on the loop will she get printed.
Number two is less than 10.
And then again it's incremented And then number becomes the value of free.
Which again is still less than 10.
So we'll get the text printed as screen.
No free is less than 10.
And so on.
And this keeps repeating until the condition is no longer true or in our case until we get up to the
number nine.
So let's change it back to warn.
Save and then refresh.
Then we also get number one all the way through to 9 to be less than 10 and that's why we needed to
insert a break tag just so each one of these is on a separate line and it's more readable.
And the next one to take a look at a variance of the while loop.
This is called a do while loop so the while loop that would just looked up will only work while a condition
is true.
However the Do While loop will always rule wants first before checking if a condition is true.
So the code between the curly braces will always run a minimum of once.
So let's take a look at how we can do a do while loop impact B.
So we start with the do keyword.
I never can just delete the brackets.
Because if you go into to ruin once whether we do.
So going to print to the screen.
The value of the variable number.
And then a break tag.
So it's on its own line.
So this section will always run and then the can provide a while and this is the condition we're going
to test against.
So while number again is less than 10.
OK.
So whatever we do will always get number printed to screen and then the loop will continue while the
condition is true.
So because this condition is true we should get a loop through all the way through to 9.
If I need to put the increments inside there.
So no plus plus.
And save.
And then refresh.
Okay.
So we get the values all the way through to 9.
So let's see what happens if we changes to be greater than symbol.
So of course one is not greater than 10.
So this is false.
So using a while loop won't get any from printed at all.
The dew section will always run once and then we shouldn't get any fin after that.
So let's test this and we just get the number one because the loop does not repeat.
OK.
So there's two more types.
Aleve so we can look at impact P the for loop and the for each loop.
So next one to take a look at the follow up for loops are useful when we know how many times we want
to repeat the loop a while loop will run until a condition is no longer true whereas a for loop when
it sets how many times the loop will run.
So let's take a look at the for loop.
So we use the four key word and then the brackets.
And of course the curly races just like the other loops.
But this time when it's pass in free parameters into the brackets.
So the first volume need to enter is the initializer and this is effectively going to be like all variable
that were used in the while loop.
So we set the variable once more of number and then went to initializes to be zero.
And then each one of these prompter's need to be separated.
Weird is senechal on.
The second prometa is our condition to test against.
So when is the number variable.
And want to test if this is less than or equal to the value of five.
Once again a semicolon.
And the third one we're going to use for incrementing.
So every time go through the loop going to increments the variable of number by one on each loop.
So no plus plus.
So just like the other loops between the car races going to equal number.
So no.
And then the variable number and then the breaktime.
And of the semicolon at the end.
OK.
That's what a for loop looks like.
So once again we begin by Sir in a initial value of zero.
And every time we loop around we check in.
If the value is less than or equal to five it is going to echo the number and also increment by one
on each loop.
So let's save and then refresh.
Great.
So got all the value so what the initial value of zero and then we'll loop through until we get to the
value of five.
OK so the last type of loop will look in his video is the.
For each loop.
It's designed to work on arrays.
So in the arrays video we looked at how to create a array and how to print a value to the browser by
selecting it by its index number just like this.
So you had an array named shapes our said that equal to an array with the values of square.
Circle.
And also triangle and they wanted to display any of these values inside the browser when needed to echo
the array of shapes.
And then inside the square brackets we needed to select the shape by it index number.
So 0 1 and 2.
So a triangle would be number two.
So it the value of triangle created a new école for each array item can be a long boring task and in
program we should always try to avoid repetition.
OK.
So let's take a look at how we can create a for each loop so we don't need this echo because we're going
to do this inside the loop.
So again if for each loop with the for each keyword and like the other loops have a set of brackets
and then the curly braces.
So the first we need to do is pass in the name of the array.
So that is the name of shapes.
And then every time we loop through the shapes array we need to store the values inside a new variable.
So do this by declaring us and then a new variable name.
So when a call is value.
And then that creates our echo.
So because of the new values stored in to our value variable when it's echo out the value variable and
then we put a brake tag inside there and a semicolon.
So that's how for each loop is laid out.
So every time we loop through the shapes array will install these values inside a new variable which
have called value.
And also at each pass of the loop it also moves on to the next item in the array.
This means that the loop will continue to live through all the values of the array until it finds the
last one.
So let's say this and then refresh the browser.
I never got so loop through the first item.
The second item on the third.
And that's a lot more convenient way of printing out all the values of an array rather than selecting
each individual index number.
Okay so I hope this video leaves you with a better understanding of how loops work.
MP HP.